## A

### API

Application Program Interface. Specifies a set of software functions that are made available to an application
programmer. The API typically includes function names, the parameters that can be passed into each functions, and a
description of the return values one can expect.

### Asymetric clustering

Also known as a failover configuration.
One machine is in hot-standby mode and does nothing by monitor the other. In case of failure, the hot-standby takes
over.

### Asymmetric multiprocessing

Each processor is assigned to a single task. One processor is called the _master (or main) processor_, and controls the
system.

## B

### Blade servers

A single chassis with multiple processor boards, I/O boards, and networking boards. Each processor board boots
independently and runs its own operating system.

### Bootstrap program

An initial program, usually stored on ROM or EEPROM memory, to initiallize all aspects of the system.

## C

### Caching

The storing of information on a faster, smaller storage system than the main memory bank where the data originates from.
Cache management is highly important due to the limited size of of the faster storage medium. There are different levels
of cache-memory, indicating the memory's proximity to the CPU (lower == closer).
As the distance to the CPU increases, so does the available memory space of the cache.

### CLI

Command Line Interface. A textual user interface, allowing for system interaction soley through text-based instructions
and feedback.

### Clustered systems

Two or more individual systems coupled together, with shared storage and closely linked via a LAN or faster
interconnect.

### Communications

These programs provide the mechanism for creating virtual connections among processes, users, and computer systems. They
allow users to send messages to anothers screens, to browse web pages, to send electronic-mail messages, to log in
remotely or to transfer files from one machine to another.

### Control card

a batch system concept. This is a command to manage the execution of a process (start, stop, interrupts, ...) . It can
be used to distinct between different error levels, and severity of instructions.

### Control program

A control program manages the execution of user programs to prevent errors and improper use of the computer.

### Context

- The circumstances in which an event occurs; a setting.
- The part of a text or statement that surrounds a particular word or passage and determines its meaning.

### CSV

Short for __"comma-separated value"__. A commonly used file format to represent tabular data. 
These files usually start with a line denoting the names of the columns. Each subsequent line is considered to be a data row.

An example:
```csv
name, age, location
Leeroy Jenkins, ?, some dungeon
Smaug, >200 years, on top of your dwarven gold
Bob The Builder, ?, construction site
```
## D

### Debugger

A program to help the user find an correct defects in their program.
The term _"bug"_ originates from one of the original calculation machines at the IBM labs. Notoriously, one of their
calculations misbehaved and the researches were unable to find a logical error in their work.
It had turned out an insect wandered into the machinery and disrupted its proper execution.
To fix their calculation, one of the research had to physically rid the machine of pesky "bugs",
hence coining the phrase _"debugging the system"_.

### DDD

Short for Domain Driven Design. (from [GlossaryTech](https://glossarytech.com/search/results?phrase=DDD.html))
Domain-Driven Design is a set of principles and schemes aimed at creating optimal systems of objects. Reduced to the
creation of software abstractions, which are called models of subject areas. These models include business logic that
establishes a link between the real conditions of the products application area and the code.

### DLM

Distrubuted lock manager. A function which ensures that no conflicting operations occur in clustered systems.

### DMA

**D**irect **M**emory **A**ccess. A specific way og organizing memory on a computer system. After settoing up buffers,
pointers, and counters for the I/O device, the device controller transfers an entire block of data directly to or from
its on-buffer storage to memory, with no intervention by the CPU. Only one interrupt is generated per block to tell the
device driver that the operation has completed, rather than the one interrupt per byte generated by low-speed devices.
While the device controller is performing those operations, the CPU is available to accomplish other work.

## F

### Fault-tolerant systems

Systems that can suffer a failure but continue to work nonetheless.

### File management

Programs that create, delete, copy, rename, print, dump, list, and generally manupulate files and directories.

### File modification

Several text editors may be available to create and modify the content of files stored on disk or other storage devices.
There may also be special commands to search contents of files or perform transformations of the text.

## G

### Garbage collection

The practice of reclaiming memory of objects that are no longer used. Control over the memory is returned to the system,
rather than being allocated to a specific program/process.

### Graceful degradation

The ability to continue providing service proportional to the level of surviving hardware in the event of a systems
failure.

### GUI

Graphical User Interface. A user interface that enables human-to-machine interaction using visual iconography that is
more complex than its purely textual CLI alternative.

## H

### Heap

Block of memory that is dynamically allocated during process run time. The heap is usually linked to a specific
execution environment or process.
In certain programming language, this memory is also referred to as "the stack".

## I

### IDE

Short for Integrated Development Environment.
An application that helps you to develop software, by combining useful features and libraries into one single
application. These IDEs usually allow you to run your tests and code without needing to leave the comfort of your
development environment.

### Interrupt Vector

An array which contains the adresses of the interrupt service routines.

## J

### Jargon

_"The specialized language of a trade, profession, or similar group, especially when viewed as difficult to understand
by outsiders."_. Its goal is to make the exchange of information more efficient by giving specific names to things that
are relevant to the in-group. It is said that the Inuit have over thirty words to differentiate between different types
of snow. Other professions, such as software developers, strongly rely on metaphors to refer to technical concepts.

### JIT compiler

Just In Time compiler. A compiler that turns the architecture-neutral byte code into native machine language for the
host computer, only when it is needed for execution. An example can be found in the Java programming language, which
uses a virtual machine to translate its source code into machine executable instructions.

## K

### Kernel mode

One of two modes of operation of a computer system. Opposed to User Mode.
When in kernel mode, priviliged instructions can be executed. A mode bit, added to the hardware, indicated the current
mode.

### KPI

Short for Key Performance Indicator.
The critical (key) indicators of progress toward an intended result. KPIs provide a focus for strategic and operational
improvement, create an analytical basis for decision-making and help focus attention on what matters most.

## L

### Layered approach

A method to make the operating system more modular. The OS is broken up into several layers (as in _"layers of a
cake"_), each of which performing a specific function.
The bottom-most layer is said to be the hardware, the top-most layer the user interface. Intermediary layers can be
added as needed. Within a layered approach, any layer consumes services from the layer _below_ it and offers services to
the one above. Effectively stacking functionality on top of each other.

## M

### Micro Kernel

A kernel in which all of the non-essential components are removed, and implemented as user-level programs.

### Monitoring call

If software needs to use external devises, or trigger an event, it must execute a _"monitoring call"_. This is called "
triggering an interrupt", as it effectively interrupts the execution of the active program.
The hardware can trigger an interrupt at any time.

### Multi-processor systems

aka. _parallel systems_ or _tightly coupled systems_ (not to be confused with tightly coupled code).
Systems that have multiple processing units enbemdded within them. They offer three main advantages:

- Increased throughput
- Economy of scale
- Increased reliability (through inherrent redundancy)

## N

### Network OS

An operating system that provides services for different computers on a network.

## P

### Paradigm

A _"paradigm"_ is a fancy word for "point of view". It is the belief system that you hold and use to make sense
of what is happening around you. You can look at it as walking around in an unknown city,
armed with a town map. If the map is not sufficiently detailed, you will find yourself ending up in the wrong place.
You might even end up driving into a lake if the map is inaccurate, digital, and talks to you.

### Pattern language

[from wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_language): A pattern language is an organized and coherent set of
patterns, each describing a problem, and the core of a solution that can be used in many ways within a specific field of
expertise.

### PCB

short for: Process Control Block.
The Process Control Block contains meta-information about a certain process, such as its state, size, ... .

### Practices

Practices are a set of actionable recipes, that can help you achieve certain goals. As with all advice, these are not
guaranteed to give results.
There exists no such thing as a sure-fire approach that works in any situation. To make these patterns as helpful as
possible, they include a short
description of the circumstances in which they usually work well.

### Pragmatic

The word _'Pragmatic'_ originally means "skilled in business". You can interpret this as thinking about the added
benefit (return on investment) of an action before deciding to do it.
A pragmatist will take pieces from various toolsets and methodologies, and apply them to the problem at hand only if it
makes sense to use them. This means that even if a new software architecture is hip and trendy,
you would look at the issue you are trying to solve first and see if the new approach is worth doing.

### Process

* __computer science:__ A computer program in execution. Processes are sometimes called “threads”, “tasks”, or “jobs”,
  often with slight nuances in meaning.
* __generic:__ A natural phenomenon marked by gradual changes that lead toward a particular result. A series of actions
  or operations conducing to an end.

### Programming language support

Compilers, assemblers, debuggers, and interpreters for comon programming languages (such as C, C++, C#, Java, Visual
Basic, .NET, PERL, ...) are often provided to the user by the Operating System.

### Program loading and execution

Once a program is assembled or compiled, it must be loaded into memory to be executed. The system may provide absolute
loaders, relocatable loaders, linkage editors, and overlay loaders. Debugging systems for either higher-lever languages
or machine languages are needed as well.

## R

### ROI

ROI or "Return on investment" is a very useful metric for strategic planning, originating from the financial sector. The
idea is to maximize for value over time.
This helps you to stay focused on the activities or task that bring the most value to your
organization/project/customer, or even your own life.
Described on [this page](/2_Productivity/Concepts/HOME?id=return-on-investment).

## S

### SCSI controller

**S**mall **C**omputer-**S**ystems **I**nterface. A controller to which devices are connected (cfr. motherboards in
personal computers, or extendable circuit boards such as the raspberry pi).

### Shells

User interfaces are known as "shells" on systems with mulltiple command interpreters.

### SMP

Symmetric multiprocessing. each processirs performs all tasks within the operating system. SMP means that all processors
are peers. No controller-worker relationship exists between them.

### Status information

Some of these programs will simply expose system characteristics such as the date, time, amount of availalble memory /
disk space, number of users, etc. Other status programs are more complex, providing detailed information on performance,
logging, and system errors.

### Swapping

Moving processes from memory, thus reducing the level of multi-execution. Later on, the process can be put back into
memory,
and continued from the point where it stopped executing.
When the process is removed from memory, a state save occurs. This means saving information about the process' current
execution status. When the process is restored, this state is restored.
On Unix systems, a dedicated `swap` partition can be created on persistent storage drives to load/unload processes from
main memory. Ideally, this partition is sized to be minimally
equal to half of the available main memory.

### Synthesis

A term that is used to describe the act of combining (often diverse) conceptions and observations into a coherent whole.

### System call

provides an interface to services made available by the operating system, such as access to hardware.

## T

### Tenet

A principle, belief, or doctrine generally held to be true. The term is often used to express a common belief held by
members of an organization, movement, or profession.
In Latin, tenet is the third person singular of the verb tenēre ("to hold") and means "he/she/it holds." It is believed
to have been borrowed into English around 1600 from Latin writings in which it often introduced the opinions held by a
particular church or sect.

### Timer

A tool to help the Operating System keep control over the CPU. The timer is set to interrupt the computer after a
specified amount of time.
Commonly used for blocked-process detection, task scheduling, and multi-threading.

## V

### Virtual System

A concept in which the hardware of a single machine is abstracted into several different execution environments. Thus
creating the illusion that each separate execution envionments is running on it's own private computer.

## W

### WIP

Work In Progress. The amount of tasks a person or team are currently working on. These are all tasks that have started
and are not yet complete. The WIP can be seen as "Intellectual inventory", meaning you pay a cost to keep it around.
Some productivity techniques advise to keep the amount of work in progress as low as possible (_e.g._ Kanban, Lean).

